## Data types (FT entities)

FT entities generalize and improve file handling of DSC. An FT entity defines and validates input (reference datasets) and output (benchmark results) of computational tools. It can specify one file in a well-defined format (e.g., BAM) or contain multiple FT entities to specify a set of files (e.g., a LGEN file, a MAP file, and a FAM file used together with plink). Each entity will contain
1.	A unique name and meta information, such as a description and a reference to its definition.
2.	A file format validator to validate if one or more files conform to its file type.
3.	Dataset summarizers to extract information from files in this file type. A summarizer will scan the dataset and produce filetype-specific statistics, such as number and types of genetic variants, number of samples, and other summary metrics. Results produced by a summarizer can be used to filter input datasets, specify parameters, and summarize outputs from benchmark runs.
4.	Optional file type converters to convert data from one file type to another. These converters process input data before feeding it to computational tools or generate simulated datasets without input data, allowing, for example, computational tools that accept different formats of input to process the same datasets.
The “summarizers” and “converters” serve as “wrappers” in many benchmarking studies (e.g., dynwrap for dynverse (54)). All utility programs (validators, summarizers, converters) will be short inline scripts that use externally defined tools or libraries (e.g., file format validators implemented in cBioPortal (57)). Researchers will need to write and publish versioned libraries (e.g., Python Package Index) for complex functionalities before they can be used in CBL entities. The scripts and version of external tools will be part of the signature of tagged entities to ensure immutability. One challenge of the CBL standard or executor is ensuring the safety of executing arbitrary user-defined utility programs. The concept of a “trusted entity” could address this problem.
